GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm Gw
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: As Sy
make for Europe, the civil war i
rages on -- why the West worries
moves to ramp up its military pr
Syria.
Then: an evolution in our knowle
human species. Researchers claim
bones are the remains of our ear
Plus, neuroeconomics and the bus
Paul Solman reports on why the b
consumers to buy brands with sta
STEVE QUARTZ, California Institu
We need to really reconsider whe
is a bad thing or a good thing,
around our need to give each oth
to feel valued in the community
value within groups.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The United States wi
another 10,000 Syrian refugees i
year starting next month. White
announced the plan today. They s
Obama wants to pay for it with $
that's already been budgeted. Th
accepted about 1,500 Syrians sin
broke out in their country more
years ago.
Thousands of refugees and migran
Europe faced new misery today, h
that fell across much of the reg
We have a report from Jonathan R
Television News.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: They are leavin
them, heading for Macedonia in t
Many of them are Syrians, and th
this exodus will stop.
At the border, a refugee camp, a
sodden people were waiting to cr
if only the Macedonians would le
The border guards are overwhelme
The refugees are overwhelmed by
they have just endured. Families
children are allowed through.
But as both sides stand bedraggl
pouring ran, the situation spins
A member of the Macedonian riot
out, his way of keeping order. A
screams from frightened women, a
adds to this downpour by burstin
The crowd is told to sit in the
Eventually, it is allowed throug
thought to be the biggest wave o
far here, though the U.N. says m
more are expected in the next tw
days.
Today, Macedonia said it was thi
a fence to stem this human flow.
race to get here in time seems l
the race to take a train north i
and then on to Germany in the de
that all this heartache and dang
worth it.
GWEN IFILL: There was also turmo
border with Austria, as Austrian
announced their system was overw
halted all trains. The Iran nucl
its major hurdle in Congress tod
guaranteeing it will take effect
Senate Democrats blocked Republi
to vote on a resolution disappro
but party leaders kept arguing e
the voting ended.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Maj
Democratic senators just voted t
and block the American people fr
a real vote on one of the most c
foreign policy issues of our tim
it's telling that Democrats woul
extreme lengths to prevent Presi
from even having to consider leg
this issue.
SEN. HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
inane response is, you're filibu
I know a lot about filibusters,
have had to file a cloture more
because of filibusters by the Re
Never in the history of the coun
ever been anything close to that
were most of those filibusters o
to proceed.
GWEN IFILL: In a statement, the
called the Senate vote -- quote
for diplomacy and for national s
But House Speaker John Boehner s
on his side of the Capitol will
tool to derail the agreement, in
a lawsuit.
A former State Department worker
to talk to Congress about settin
Clinton's private e-mail server
secretary of state. Bryan Paglia
today before a House committee i
the attack on U.S. diplomats in
Libya. As expected, he cited his
right against self-incrimination
The presidential campaign erupte
of verbal food fight today, with
at its center. The Republican fr
made GOP rival Carly Fiorina his
In a "Rolling Stone" magazine pr
belittled Fiorina's appearance a
you imagine that the face of our
Trump insisted today he was talk
Fiorina's persona and not her fa
But Republicans and Democrats, i
Clinton, condemned the crack. Cl
in Columbus, Ohio.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D), Pres
We hear from candidates on the o
about turning back the clock on
And there is one particular cand
just seems to delight in insulti
chance he gets. I have to say, i
I would love to debate him.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Trump also went afte
Ben Carson for questioning his r
He said Carson wasn't much of a
has no chance of being elected.
And yet another rival, Louisiana
Bobby Jindal, branded Trump a ca
who would kill Republican chance
the White House.
The trials of six Baltimore poli
in the death of Freddie Gray wil
Baltimore. A judge denied their
for a change of venue. Gray died
in police custody, triggering pr
and curfews.
New York City's police departmen
how former tennis star James Bla
by mistake. A witness misidentif
yesterday as a suspect in a cred
ring. Police then pushed him to
and handcuffed him. Today, Commi
Bratton apologized and said he w
why Blake was roughed up, among
WILLIAM BRATTON, New York City P
We were also concerned administr
the failure to make any notifica
arrest and detention of Mr. Blak
was inappropriately arrested and
in handcuffs for a period of tim
GWEN IFILL: The officer involved
has been stripped of his badge a
officials investigate.
In Japan, a tropical storm that
rainfall left the central part o
reeling. Twenty inches fell, tou
heavy flooding around the city o
more than 100,000 people to flee
torrents swept through the regio
Tokyo, sweeping away homes and t
had to pluck scores of stranded
rooftops.
A scorching heat wave smothered
again today. Temperatures headed
degrees in Los Angeles and 90 ar
The heat has generated record de
to run air conditioning, and for
to go to cooling centers.
And on Wall Street, stocks manag
gains. The Dow Jones industrial
about 77 points to close at 1633
rose nearly 40 points, and the S
up 10.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
rebels advance, has Russia stepp
military support for President A
a 9/11 memorial dedicated to the
Flight 93, and much more.
The U.S. military reported today
airstrikes in Northeast Syria We
three Islamic State fighting pos
the U.S. effort may be getting m
as Moscow steps up its support f
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad
As momentum in the Syrian war ha
to Islamic State militants and o
government forces have suffered
blow after another. Today, ISIS
in on a military base in northea
el-Zour province, the government
outpost there. And to the northw
rebels and others drove the Syri
out of Idlib province this week.
Amid those setbacks, President B
has increasingly turned to Russi
Amateur video and images posted
media in recent days appear to s
of a Russian military buildup. F
Sergei Lavrov confirmed today th
has sent advisers and weapons, b
not confirm Russian forces are i
actual combat.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign M
translator): Russian military pe
present in Syria. They have been
many years. Their presence is co
weapon supplies for the Syrian a
military presence is there to he
become familiar with this equipm
GWEN IFILL: Others are worried.
minister said the Russians have
an active force and are building
in Western Syria to launch strik
Islamic State targets.
And in Washington yesterday, Sec
State John Kerry raised the issu
call with Lavrov.
JOHN KIRBY, Pentagon Press Secre
our concern about these reports
military activities or buildup,
in Syria, and made very clear ou
if true and if borne out, those
be -- could lead to greater viol
-- even more instability in Syri
GWEN IFILL: U.S. officials say R
could interfere with a year-old
campaign against ISIS, which is
to help moderate Syrians.
So, what are the Russians up to
and what's the impact on the gro
For some answers, we turn to Pav
Russian military scholar and the
director at the Peace Research I
Oslo, and Steven Simon, a visiti
at Dartmouth College. He served
Security Council staff during th
Clinton administrations.
Pavel Baev, what do we know of t
of the Russian involvement right
PAVEL BAEV, Peace Research Insti
little is actually known for fac
is known doesn't make much sense
what the Russians are saying is,
supplying -- were supplying smal
and personnel carriers and some
and some technical personnel.
This sort of military weapons do
any technical advisers and perso
pretty elementary. So the feelin
the little increase in Russian m
produced a lot of political spin
was deliberate.
GWEN IFILL: Steven Simon, do we
talking about advisory help or c
STEVEN SIMON, Dartmouth College:
know that the Russians are worri
-- the viability of the Syrian r
now.
The Syrians have -- that is, the
absorbed pretty serious losses o
year. They had a good year in 20
not very good. They lost Idlib.
Palmyra. They're under pressure
and now they're under pressure i
at Deir el-Zour.
They have got a demographic prob
not clear how long they can actu
up the fight. For the Russians,
of this regime is extremely impo
a number of reasons, and I serio
they're going to let it go down.
I infer from that that the kind
they're preparing to provide to
will be military assistance, ass
will help keep the Syrian regime
on the battlefield at a very pre
GWEN IFILL: Pavel Baev, if Steve
right in his inference that ther
support, if not there already, o
why now? What is it about are we
Vladimir Putin that would sugges
necessary?
PAVEL BAEV: I think, for Putin,
of now is very much related to h
speech in the U.N. General Assem
He wants to make an impression.
deliver a big initiative, and th
that initiative is that it is ti
our efforts in the coalition aga
and to make President Bashar al-
of the solution, because, withou
only violent chaos. And so he ne
Bashar al-Assad stronger, feel,
than he really is.
And he also needs, one, to make
that Russia is really preparing
serious. And impressions matter.
military intervention could beco
political factor.
GWEN IFILL: Steven Simon, what d
get out of this?
STEVEN SIMON: It gets a number o
of it.
First of all, Putin's foreign po
in many respects. This is just a
He's quite inclined to put a sti
Obama's eye, and this serves tha
It puts down a trip wire to U.S.
action that might be directed ag
regime.
The U.S. can no longer be assure
they hit regime targets, they wo
and that's an escalation that I
the administration would not fav
also believe, as one seen senior
told me not that long ago, that,
goes, the capital of Syria moves
to Raqqa, which is the Syrian ci
has made its headquarters.
They take that very seriously. A
Russia is still a maritime power
to have a presence in the Easter
presumably. They have got intell
and naval facilities in Syria. A
can put themselves in a position
those investments and protect th
I assume that they would.
GWEN IFILL: There has been some
with what the U.S. is trying to
getting Bulgaria and another cou
overflights, to not allow Russia
airspace into Syria to deliver w
is delivering. Is that something
work?
PAVEL BAEV: I think it's mostly
because for Russia, the main way
is still from the sea. And the p
go through Iran and Iraq airspac
So it's mostly exchange of signa
of political gesture as to what
what is not, what we like, what
what we can do, what we cannot d
on the Russian side, the capacit
really a difference in the battl
Syria is very limited because mo
battalions are tied up in Ukrain
There's very little they can rea
there, maybe a symbolic squadron
to deliver a few strikes, which,
not make much of a difference, b
don't have real-time intelligenc
have high-precision weapons. It'
symbolism which is involved ther
But, at the same time, Russians
really present big time at the p
in the Middle East to make thems
just relevant, but central.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's talk, St
about the political game and the
game and the potential for this
standoff to lead to Syria becomi
in a standoff between the U.S. a
How likely is that? How possible
STEVEN SIMON: Well, I think the
probably want to avoid that.
Look, the Russian deployment, I
have a military effect if it's c
More importantly, it will have a
the cohesion of the Syrian regim
of the regime who the United Sta
hoping to peel away from Assad i
of a transition scenario will no
you know, the regime has a major
its corner, in addition to the I
are now perhaps more able to act
of the regime with the nuclear i
table.
So I think, you know, this does
the Syrian regime in a stronger
This isn't something that the Un
really, I think, has the leverag
with effectively, really to coun
has two choices. And maybe this
an exaggeration. It's a dichotom
But, on the one hand, if you can
join them, so find a way to coop
the Russians, pull them into an
coalition, coordinate airstrikes
the Russian effort in that direc
alternative, really to try to bl
move entirely, is going to be ve
in part because, as the other sp
the Russians have plenty of othe
for getting this military equipm
assistance into Syria.
It's not something the U.S. can
a game of Whac-A-Mole with vario
whose airspace the Russians need
GWEN IFILL: Pavel Baev, what do
about those choices?
PAVEL BAEV: I think the choices
very limited, because the situat
is indeed very difficult, and it
to say that we want peace in Syr
normalization, and we also want
Assad to go out.
Whether the elimination of this
for a long time has been the mai
only of the United States, but a
of many Arab states, whether it
anywhere is very difficult to sa
with the rise of ISIS. And so Pu
to play on this uncertainty, to
opportunity which is there for h
GWEN IFILL: Opportunities exploi
Once again, Pavel Baev of the Pe
Institute in Oslo and Steven Sim
College, thank you both very muc
A day before the anniversary of
is commemorated, hundreds came t
today for the opening of a long-
center that honors heroism and g
93.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A soft rain fe
gathered crowd as officials and
dedicated the Flight 93 National
outside Shanksville, Pennsylvani
SALLY JEWELL, U.S. Interior Secr
as family members, have shared l
richly lived in the photos that
of really everyday citizens who
to face with evil, but through t
and their selflessness saved unt
and protected another sacred and
American site, the U.S. Capitol
This site is their final resting
it is also a place for us to hon
have given to all of us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fourteen years
United Flight 93 crashed in what
a quiet field. It was one of fou
flights rerouted by al-Qaida ter
others struck the World Trade Ce
Pentagon, but the 40 passengers
Flight 93 stopped their plane fr
its target.
GORDON FELT, Brother of Flight 9
They chose to act. They fought b
breached the cockpit and fought
of that flight. And, in doing so
their lives, but, in the process
countless other lives, and, agai
saved the Capitol Building.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gordon Felt, w
Edward was on board, has been th
force behind the construction of
visitor center complex that tell
of everyone on the flight. It in
machine recordings left for love
as this one from flight attendan
CEECEE LYLES, Flight Attendant:
have to listen to me carefully.
that's been hijacked. I'm on the
calling from the plane. I want t
I love you. Please tell my child
love them very much, and I'm so
I don't know what to say. There'
They have hijacked the plane. I'
be calm. We're turned around, an
that there's planes that have be
flown into the World Trade Cente
to be able to see your face agai
love you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Outside, a pat
the plane's route leads visitors
break in two 40-foot-high walls
the shape of an airplane wing. T
to a view of another path reserv
taking them to the impact site,
with a boulder.
A long granite wall engraved wit
of the victims was completed in
architect Paul Murdoch described
for the whole site.
PAUL MURDOCH, Architect: The fig
is never completed. Liberty is n
but is maintained and reestablis
each generation. And like freedo
design is open-ended, requiring
to help sustain its legacy throu
commitment and engagement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Three presiden
Shanksville over the years. Tomo
Obama will mark the 9/11 anniver
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
that could change the way we thi
evolution; Paul Solman reports o
of cool; plus, a Brief But Spect
on modern life and its distracti
But, first, as the school year b
college campuses spring back to
state is starting what could be
of many experiments with free co
President Obama has been making
it on the road this week.
Special correspondent Yasmeen Qu
to Tennessee to see how campuses
the experiment.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Every year, mor
students pour into Tennessee's c
WOMAN: We want you to come, so t
get kind of an understanding, a
YASMEEN QURESHI: This year, comm
in Tennessee are anticipating re
as a part of a new statewide pro
Tennessee Promise.
Here in Nashville, Tennessee, th
is implementing a new program th
community college to students fo
two years. Some experts say it c
game-changer in higher education
is the first state in the countr
it a shot.
CEDRIC GREGORY, Student: I'm goi
sure that I'm keeping school my
priority. I really just want to
make sure that my life is on the
it needs to be.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Cedric Gregory
freshman at Volunteer State Comm
as a part of Tennessee Promise.
program started, he wasn't plann
to college right out of high sch
CEDRIC GREGORY: I'm already stre
about it. I already know it's go
tough, but as long as I keep my
I think I will be able to do it.
YASMEEN QURESHI: He will work pa
support himself and help his mom
and sees college as a way to avo
in his small rural hometown nort
CEDRIC GREGORY: Using the kids w
and constantly mess up their own
them as an example. Like, this i
I want to be. I want to do somet
my life.
YASMEEN QURESHI: To take part, s
to fill out the federal applicat
aid, meet with a volunteer mento
hours of community service. More
students met the final August de
eligibility.
GOV. BILL HASLAM (R), Tennessee:
to me, the most rewarding thing
into a room where we have mentor
with students.
YASMEEN QURESHI: The requirement
Bill Haslam says, were simple by
GOV. BILL HASLAM: There really i
gap that has been created in thi
And I think at the heart of that
in educational opportunities.
And so for families that either
it or just don't think they can
we had to do something to change
selfishly as a state, we had to
say to employers out there, you'
for a trained work force and you
skills training than they have h
we can provide that in Tennessee
YASMEEN QURESHI: In fact, Haslam
country as a whole is lagging be
it comes to education.
GOV. BILL HASLAM: I think, as re
10 years ago, the United States
in the world in the percentage o
with a degree beyond high school
now we have slipped to 10th, 11t
Forever, one of the competitive
we have had as a country is that
post-secondary education than an
ever did. But that is changing.
YASMEEN QURESHI: The U.S. is sli
more and more jobs require an ed
high school, the portion of adul
college degree or certificate ha
Earlier this year, President Bar
unveiled his own proposal for a
community college program. It's
part on the Tennessee approach,
president's plan, the federal go
75 percent of the student's tuit
state pays 25 percent.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the U
Community colleges should be fre
willing to work for it, because,
a quality education cannot be a
that's reserved for a few.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Students in Ten
showing up. Volunteer State is e
500 more students than last year
the total student body by 6 perc
Short leads student services and
for the campus.
EMILY SHORT, Volunteer State Com
I think that in the state of Ten
the inception of the Promise pro
we in higher education -- during
in higher education, I think tha
been more encouraged by the stat
governing board of Tennessee Boa
to be more innovative in what we
YASMEEN QURESHI: But keeping stu
is another challenge. At Volunte
just 16 percent of students grad
percent transfer to another scho
EMILY SHORT: A lot of our studen
meaning that their parents never
a college degree. And so they re
don't have a strong support netw
them to go to college, because I
that sometimes they understand t
and the benefit behind it.
EDITH LESTER, Volunteer State Co
So, what I want you to do now is
we looked at multiplication and
the fractions, algebraic fractio
review right here.
YASMEEN QURESHI: That's why Vol
other colleges are giving studen
to help them stay in school. One
a summer program that gives stud
low test scores a chance to impr
math and English skills. The thr
review crucial high school mater
the school year starts.
STUDENT: To make it like Y-squar
EDITH LESTER: How am I going to
YASMEEN QURESHI: Edith Lester is
at Vol State. She has seen the t
behind can take on students acad
EDITH LESTER: Many of them are c
of high schools not as prepared
them to be. If they can bridge t
they come in to college at the s
as a student who doesn't have th
and that's fair, because if they
those gaps, it's kind of like th
at a losing end.
YASMEEN QURESHI: Still, not ever
thinks the colleges can deliver
they're making to new freshmen.
Memphis Congressman Steve Cohen
a scholarship program in the sta
can also use at four-year colleg
that's a big advantage, when you
rates into account.
REP. STEVE COHEN (D), Tennessee:
of the students who start at com
end up, within four years, gradu
college. So you're taking and pu
into an 87 percent failure progr
YASMEEN QURESHI: And, Cohen says
college is already free for need
who qualify for federal grants.
REP. STEVE COHEN: The people tha
most money out of this are going
folks who've got higher incomes
accomplish. Slackers.
YASMEEN QURESHI: But the governo
not about who gets the tuition m
goal is simple: getting as many
students as possible to enroll i
GOV. BILL HASLAM: Free gets ever
And the reason we have record nu
applying for financial aid, the
have record numbers of kids appl
to school is the Tennessee Promi
their attention.
YASMEEN QURESHI: And the campaig
be working. Free tuition is what
and his friend Nicholas Tays (ph
CEDRIC GREGORY: My mom is single
be paying for most of my stuff.
have to work a couple years just
enough money for tuition, for ev
couple years, so...
NICHOLAS TAYS, Student: And by t
that happens, we're already stuc
lifestyle, and it's too hard to
it.
YASMEEN QURESHI: To keep receivi
dollars, they will have to maint
a C average, be enrolled full-ti
more community service each year
knows what will keep him motivat
CEDRIC GREGORY: I will be the fi
college, yes, out of my whole fa
the fact that I can do that is -
cool just to have the title in m
to graduate.
YASMEEN QURESHI: If the state's
goes as planned, many more Tenne
will be claiming that title.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Yasm
in Nashville.
GWEN IFILL: Researchers announce
discovery today that some consid
the greatest in the last 50 year
that could provide an important
family tree for all humans.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: The bones were fo
cave 30 miles northwest of Johan
the way they were found and then
is another incredible part of th
In all, 1,500 fossil remains wer
up and contained remains of 15 i
of all different ages. Scientist
new species Homo naledi and crea
The quest is chronicled in the n
"National Geographic" and in a s
airing on "NOVA" next week calle
of Humanity."
Here's a short clip.
NARRATOR: As the analysis goes o
from the Rising Star cave are fi
to be presented to the world.
MAN: We have got a new species o
in the genus Homo, and that's tr
exciting.
We have never had anything in th
period between the late Australo
the earliest members of our genu
of abundance, and, boy, we have
now.
NARRATOR: To members of the team
suggest a creature unlike anythi
before.
MAN: We are looking at creatures
humanlike in their feet, humanli
hands, humanlike in their teeth.
that interacts directly with the
is Homo, and everything that's s
you know, the trunk, the archite
vertebral column, the brain, tho
things are more primitive. It's
is crafting us from the outside
JEFFREY BROWN: And joining me no
Shreeve, executive director for
"National Geographic" magazine.
involved with this project almos
start. And Becca Peixotto is a m
time. She was one of the so-call
excavators who slipped through t
narrower spaces to reach the fos
Very interesting, very cool stuf
MD-BOJAMIE SHREEVE, "National
Very cool.
JEFFREY BROWN: Start with Jamie
Set the scene for us. This was a
finding.
JAMIE SHREEVE: Yes, pretty much.
A couple of cavers were explorin
site that's been looked at. Peop
it. It's very well known, and th
a little opening that's only eig
wide in some places. One of them
down, took another step down, an
it just kept going down.
So they dropped into this cavern
never been explored for, you kno
how long, and they found the flo
cave littered with bones, with h
JEFFREY BROWN: And, Becca Peixot
where you come in. Is it true th
brought in through a social medi
a call for small people who coul
kind of work?
BECCA PEIXOTTO, Excavation Team
was an ad put out on Facebook, o
to find archaeologists, people w
as archaeologists...
JEFFREY BROWN: That's mind-blowi
right, from Facebook to this kin
But go ahead.
BECCA PEIXOTTO: Exactly, yes.
So, small archaeologists who had
skills in climbing and caving. A
an unusual skill set, to have ex
and be comfortable working in a
JEFFREY BROWN: And this is not y
area.
BECCA PEIXOTTO: It's true. I am
historical archaeologist, so I w
from the last 500 years, and not
are in the order of millions of
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so describe
for -- the setting in the cave a
chamber. What was it like to cli
BECCA PEIXOTTO: Well, you drop d
a chute. You climb through a chu
As Jamie said, it's about seven
wide at its narrowest bits, whic
skinny. And it's a complicated c
there is a small landing zone, w
off our shoes, and we entered th
actually barefoot, because there
fossil material on the floor of
being barefoot, we were more con
where we were stepping to help f
the fossils were on the ground.
JEFFREY BROWN: And was it hard w
-- what was it like?
BECCA PEIXOTTO: We were working
and paintbrushes, so toothpicks,
And it's very tedious work, exci
but you're moving the soil away
by grain in an effort to free th
from the matrix that they're enc
damaging them.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, Jamie Shreeve
we know so far about Homo naledi
heard in that clip, humanlike fr
primitive on the inside?
JAMIE SHREEVE: Right.
We know this is a really bizarre
nothing -- nothing like it has b
before in the fossil record. It
strange mix of characteristics t
much like us.
For instance, the foot is virtua
to a human foot, and yet the sho
like an ape. Brain is a little p
So, it's a complicated equation
by this fossil.
JEFFREY BROWN: Researchers don't
the age of it, I gather.
JAMIE SHREEVE: No, that's the bi
mark that's outstanding, because
have an age, you can really star
the story of how this fits in wi
of human evolution.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, when you sa
are humanlike, does that suggest
upright?
JAMIE SHREEVE: Oh, there is no d
this was an upright biped, and n
upright biped, but one with -- h
and feet constructed for probabl
striding gate like ours, so it w
walking upright.
JEFFREY BROWN: The cave, I gathe
potentially to be, just by the s
of bones there and other remnant
been a burial site?
JAMIE SHREEVE: Well, the researc
like to use the word burial.
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
JAMIE SHREEVE: Because it has co
of ceremony and an afterlife.
But it does seem to be that the
explanation for how these bones
a remote place was that they put
other Homo naledi individuals, d
disposed of. Now, whether they h
of an afterlife or whether they
getting rid of these bodies, nob
And, in fact, we really don't kn
the explanation, but that seems
best so far.
JEFFREY BROWN: You were in this
it was. What did it feel like to
the astounding number of bones i
of, I gather, from just in one p
this, in Africa, certainly?
BECCA PEIXOTTO: Absolutely.
We excavated an area that was le
meter square and about 15 centim
and from that area, we got more
individual fossil specimens. And
of that assemblage is really dra
it's really unusual in fossil si
JEFFREY BROWN: You -- we were ta
the small skull, right? You held
BECCA PEIXOTTO: I did, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: What was that lik
BECCA PEIXOTTO: Nerve-racking.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're taking a d
as you say it, right, a big sigh
BECCA PEIXOTTO: Yes. Yes. It was
to be there when the skull was c
of the ground, coming out of the
very gently trying to place it i
to bring it to the surface witho
apart, because these fossils are
particularly when they are first
I take a deep breath now because
held my breath the whole time we
on the skull.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have a sense
of what you were holding, right?
BECCA PEIXOTTO: Yes, definitely,
of it, that here we were with al
fossil specimens and were coming
a very large fragment of a skull
build a picture of what this cre
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, Jamie S
you try to think of the importan
finding, you were saying we stil
learn a lot more to see how it f
own evolution, but how would you
importance right now?
JAMIE SHREEVE: Well, I think it'
you know, one of the most import
in the last 50 years since Lucy.
And the reason for that is becau
so much of it. Most of the time,
find a new hominid fossil, you f
or a skull or a leg bone. Here,
bones. So you actually know a gr
this creature that you couldn't
from just a fragment.
So, there will be a lot of analy
to come. And the date is extreme
going forward to knowing how thi
it seems to be something that is
beginning to have the Homo linea
may help us inform this sort of
of how our genus evolved from th
form called Australopithecus.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, very briefly
there are thought to be many, ma
left in the cave, right, so ther
more to do.
JAMIE SHREEVE: Yes, it is litter
if I'm not mistaken, right?
BECCA PEIXOTTO: It certainly is.
We went back a second time for a
of excavation in March of 2014,
a couple hundred more fossil spe
we were able to recover some fos
we were hoping to get, but we ce
not exhaust the fossil supply in
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, amazin
Becca Peixotto and Jamie Shreeve
so much.
JAMIE SHREEVE: Thank you.
BECCA PEIXOTTO: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: It is amazing.
The program "Dawn of Humanity" i
right now on PBS.org. And it wil
week on "NOVA."
You probably heard quite a bit d
last 24 hours about the latest c
from Apple, iPads and iPhones, t
circles quickly become the lates
gadget. But what exactly makes a
Economics correspondent Paul Sol
cool guy himself, has been explo
Here's what he found, part of ou
Making Sense, which airs every T
the "NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: An MRI machine at t
Institute of Technology, where s
are helping pioneer the study of
how the brain makes economic dec
key brain structure that disting
from fellow primates, the medial
cortex.
STEVE QUARTZ, California Institu
It's a part of our brain that's
social status or our perceived s
PAUL SOLMAN: In 2005, Steve Quar
Caltech colleagues were surprise
that this chunk of gray matter i
not only when thinking about our
also by looking at status symbol
from certain brands we tend to t
cool, Apple, Scion, Chuck Taylor
a more primitive brain structure
ventral striatum.
STEVE QUARTZ: The central reward
that is involved in literally ev
addiction.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, this MacBook Ai
that that's cool. If I look at i
to stimulate the same part of th
if I won at gambling or took som
STEVE QUARTZ: Absolutely. It's a
how much social reward we would
PAUL SOLMAN: What converted Quar
consumerism he had formerly cond
the biological basis of brands p
cool and seeing them touch both
most primitive parts of our brai
highest, most socialized selves.
To illustrate, Quartz took us to
Boulevard, on New Year's Day, th
college football's Rose Bowl Par
of year, Pasadena's main shoppin
the Tesla showroom.
STEVE QUARTZ: One of our needs i
society, where we encounter more
day than probably our ancestors
over their whole lifetime, is ou
very rapidly evaluate other peop
And one of the most potent ways
is through our automobiles. So,
just a thing. It's a set of symb
that we have to figure out in or
how we navigate our social world
car.
PAUL SOLMAN: Owning a Tesla says
environmentalist, a Volvo, I car
ACTOR: Were the Wright brothers
gates, Les Paul, Ali.
STEVE QUARTZ: Cadillac last year
campaign where they made sure pe
the car is an American car.
ACTOR: It's pretty simple. You w
you create your own luck, and yo
to believe anything is possible.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ford's response?
ACTRESS: You work hard, you beli
is possible, and you try to make
better. You try.
STEVE QUARTZ: Am I, by owning a
someone who endorses kind of ind
values of America? Or am I, by o
someone who appreciates more of
that I can build with my car own
PAUL SOLMAN: Or are my tastes so
Consider the least expensive Mer
too, can now afford the good lif
status of belonging to a distinc
of cool.
To Quartz, the idea of cool, now
of his new book, propelled the p
of separate but equal status gro
STEVE QUARTZ: Cool began in the
cool. To be cool wasn't to confo
be integrated into mainstream so
biggest sin for the cool rebel o
was to sell out.
PAUL SOLMAN: He argues that what
a look, the rebel without a caus
neuroeconomically speaking, for
and the rest of us thereafter.
STEVE QUARTZ: What happened in t
that, as we began to increase ou
of living, in a hierarchical soc
created what we can think of as
There just wasn't enough status
And what people began to do, esp
began to do, was create alternat
systems.
PAUL SOLMAN: Create them through
Take Apple, which positioned its
cool as early as the first Macin
so famously debuted in 1984.
ACTOR: We shall obey.
PAUL SOLMAN: Apple may have gone
as it were, with a follow-up ad
users of rival IBM P.C.s were le
ACTOR: You can look into it, or
on with business as usual.
PAUL SOLMAN: Its rebel identity
though, even if today's lemmings
be Apple devotees.
RICK EISENLORD, Apple Consumer:
Apple Watch. I have got the Appl
iPhone.
PAUL SOLMAN: Rick Eisenlord is a
pastor whose flock buys as he do
RICK EISENLORD: So, they have Ap
too. And, you know, we get toget
-- especially when something new
and it's a lot of fun. It's like
got an Apple Watch, you got the
And so there's an excitement and
of a feeling of camaraderie.
STEVE QUARTZ: It came to really
surprise and shock to me to find
we look more inside the brain fo
how all this stuff gives us an o
to create social networks, to cr
to create alliances. All the thi
daily, when we interact with oth
around in a lot of ways our cons
PAUL SOLMAN: Not for everyone, o
What, if anything, do you think
user -- and I'm one, too -- says
SERGIO BAZ, Apple Consumer: Noth
PAUL SOLMAN: Nothing?
SERGIO BAZ: Nothing.
HALEY JACOBSON, Apple Consumer:
of people that use Apple. But I
of people that don't use Apple,
doesn't really make a difference
PAUL SOLMAN: But aren't we being
by advertisers and their brands?
at teenagers. As Amy Heckerling
her 1995 film, "Clueless":
ACTRESS: I mean, come on. It loo
just fell out of bed and put on
pants with a backwards cap. And,
expected to swoon?
PAUL SOLMAN: Blame biology, says
STEVE QUARTZ: We all know that,
our kids become teenagers, they
with their social life. They bec
concerned about how they are doi
social group. It's because this
brain is coming online, and it's
social environment much more imp
them.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, as that part of
develops, that's where peer pres
from?
STEVE QUARTZ: That's right.
PAUL SOLMAN: And so is this why
are so brand-conscious?
STEVE QUARTZ: That's right, beca
is an extension of themselves. T
trying to figure out what their
the brand helps them kind of dev
self.
PAUL SOLMAN: Quartz recalls s hi
obsessions growing up in Toronto
STEVE QUARTZ: In Canada, we have
had two stripes called North Sta
wore them when you were 8 or 10,
But in high school, you wore Adi
three stripes. And so I recall,
with my mother, a standoff in a
holding out for the third stripe
for that -- a kid, having that t
meant all the difference between
or not cool.
PAUL SOLMAN: And when, if ever,
over that?
STEVE QUARTZ: I think we all sti
throughout our whole life to be
to these kinds of processes.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, in the end, th
epiphany of Professor Quartz's b
STEVE QUARTZ: We need to really
whether our consumerism is a bad
a good thing, specifically aroun
to give each other status, to fe
in the community and to create v
groups.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is economics c
Paul Solman in Pasadena, reporti
of my long-since-mature medial p
cortex, for the "PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: See, I told you Paul
Now to our weekly feature Brief
Tonight, Trudy Goodman urges to
back and take a deep breath.
TRUDY GOODMAN, Founder, InsightL
is a way to be mindful without m
with other activities, because w
doing other activities. We're on
We're connected. We don't ever h
with ourselves.
That sense of both all the time
and the urgency of what we need
now, they can peacefully coexist
can come together. The trouble w
this work is that it is so simpl
don't want to believe it.
Mindful walking. Mindful eating.
What activity wouldn't be helped
by bringing more focus and care
to it, as well as lessening the
of our investment in everything
that is the biggest source of st
It's like building muscle with r
at the gym. Each moment that we
moment that we are here for it a
it builds the strength to endure
we might not have any choice abo
We become aware that we're opera
this frame of expectation and co
is to what should be. And the aw
that itself seems to just sort o
clean the lens, and that polishi
lens, our the light-gathering de
us appreciate what is here, inst
for what isn't.
My name is Trudy Goodman, and th
But Spectacular take on mindfuln
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour" on
art project in New York City is
signs to challenge onlookers to
tense subject, racism. The signs
from the Black Lives Matter move
will be installed along a city s
You can see a photo gallery of s
right now on our Arts page.
And what happens when a veteran
There are 65,000 green card hold
in the military, some of whom ar
leave the country after committi
We discuss this on the latest ed
podcast, Shortwave. Find that li
home page.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for to
On Friday, William Brangham join
as they board trains from Hungar
Europe.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here to
with Mark Shields and David Broo
For all of us here at the "PBS N
thank you, and good night.